In the second part of this lecture, we will consider Earth's interior structure and introduce the concept of rheology. We'll also discuss the second major space hazard, geomagnetic storms. The Earth doesn't wobble much in rotation, and gravity is almost constant over its surface. From these very basic observations, we can deduce that Earth's mass is uniformly distributed in concentric spherical shells, as depicted here. Earth's spherical shape and its size, with its radius averaging 6,370 km, have been known well since Eratosthenes in about 240 BC. Newton's law of universal gravitation provided a way of estimating Earth's mass in the Skihalion experiment of 1774. The experiment involved measuring the tiny deflection of a pendulum due to the gravitational attraction of a nearby mountain. Skihalion in Scotland was considered the ideal location thanks to its isolation from surrounding topography and its almost symmetrical shape. The deflection angle depended on the relative densities and volumes of the Earth and the mountain. If the density and volume of Skihalion could be ascertained, then so could the density of Earth. This experiment revealed the average density of Earth to be about 5.5 g per cm3. We know that rocks commonly exposed at Earth's surface have densities of just 2-3 g per cm3. We can therefore deduce that density increases inwards. Earth's interior can only be observed directly to a few km depth, and only within Earth's outermost solid layer, the crust. The crust is dominated by silica-rich igneous rocks like granite and basalt, and their sedimentary derivatives like sandstones and shales. It is a very thin layer, averaging 5-10 km beneath the oceans and 30-40 km beneath the continents, less than a percentage point of Earth's radius of 6,370 km. Drilling is limited firstly by the high temperatures and pressures, and secondly by the soft ductile rocks that are encountered at several km depth. The drilling record was set by the Kola Superdeep borehole, a Soviet scientific drilling project in the Kola peninsula of Russia, starting in 1970. By 1989 it reached 12,226 m below the surface, which remains the deepest artificial point on Earth. Temperatures of 180 °C made drilling deeper unfeasible, and drilling was stopped in 1992. In the end, the borehole only penetrated about a third of the way through the local continental crust. So we can't reach rocks deeper than 12 km, but rocks deeper than 12 km can come to us. Volcanic lavas sometimes bring up xenoliths, or foreign rocks, from the underlying mantle. Kimberlite pipes are an unusual type of extinct volcano that brings up material from as deep as 450 km below the surface, including diamonds. This basalt contains a xenolith of peridotite, the main constituent rock of the upper mantle. Its density is about 3.2 g per cm3, and the green colour is from the mineral olivine. Laboratory experiments show how minerals such as olivine react under increasing temperature and pressure. These experiments use a diamond anvil apparatus to compress small rock samples to pressures as great as 200 GPa. That's 2 million times atmospheric pressure, and the equivalent of around 3,000 km of depth within the Earth. Olivine undergoes a series of reactions to even denser forms such as spinel and perovskite. At pressures expected of the lower mantle, perovskite reaches a density of 5 g per cm3. Because the average density of Earth is 5.5 g per cm3, there must be something even denser beneath the mantle. That, of course, would be Earth's metallic core. The best way of illuminating Earth's deep structure is with earthquake seismology, the study of seismic waves generated in earthquakes. This computer model shows how the two major types of seismic waves, compressional P-waves in orange and shear S-waves in blue, are reflected or refracted at major boundaries in the Earth, such as the core-mantle boundary at 2,900 km depth. Recordings of these seismic waves can be used to infer the depths of these boundaries, as well as some of the physical characteristics of the major shells. For example, we can observe that one of the two types of seismic wave, the shear wave or S-wave in blue, does not penetrate into the outer core. This is how we know that the outer core is still molten, since shear waves do not pass through liquids. This plot, derived from decades of seismic observations, show how average seismic wave velocities vary with depth in the Earth. Sharp jumps in velocity mark out the boundaries between the mantle, the outer core and the inner core. These velocity measurements can be used to infer how density varies. Note the extreme density contrast at the core-mantle boundary, which is greater even than the density contrast between the solid Earth's surface and the atmosphere. Interestingly, seismic velocity drops at the core-mantle boundary, even though density increases. This is because seismic velocity depends on how stiff the material is. The silicate rock of the mantle is much stiffer than the iron of the core. Chemically, crustal silicate rocks are richer in aluminium and sodium, whereas mantle silicate rocks are richer in iron and magnesium. As we know, the core is made mostly of iron, though it is also thought to contain some nickel. Next up, we will consider Earth's rheological structure. Rheology refers to how materials strain or deform under stress. We have already seen that the Earth's outer core is a liquid. The inner core is a solid, but we will not consider its rheology in detail. Instead, we will focus on the rheology of the mantle and the crust. But first, let's take a closer look at those terms, stress and strain. Stress means force per unit area. The units are newtons per square metre or pascals. Strain describes the change in shape or deformation that occurs due to stress. Strain is unitless. Tensional stress occurs when material is pulled at. Note that the stress shown in red is acting perpendicular to the surface of the square. It leads to extension strain as the square deforms into a rectangle. Compressional stress occurs when material is squeezed and leads to a type of strain called contraction or shortening. Again, the stresses are acting perpendicular to the surface of the square. Finally, shear stress occurs when material is sheared with stresses applied parallel to the surface. It results in a pattern of strain called simple shear. Note that the original square is now a rhombus. Solids can have various rheologies depending on how they strain in response to stress. Elastic solids are those in which the deformation is recoverable. After the stress is removed, the material returns to its original shape. Brittle solids are those which, when stressed to their elastic limit, break or fracture. Plastic solids are those in which the deformation is permanent. After the stress is removed, the material remains deformed. Stressed for long periods, plastic materials may flow like a viscous fluid. Viscosity means internal resistance to flow. This is known as ductile deformation. Brie cheese is a common ductile solid. Left on a table in your kitchen, it will slowly flow. Note that you can still cut the cheese though. It is not a liquid but a solid. Different materials respond to stress differently, but the same material can also exhibit different responses depending on time, temperature, and pressure. For example, abrupt stresses, low temperatures, and low pressures promote elastic or brittle failure, whereas slow stresses, high temperatures, and high pressures promote plastic flow. Some materials can therefore act in one way at short timescales but in another way over long timescales. Silly putty is a great example of this. Throw it at the floor and it will bounce elastically. Pull at it slowly and it will stretch plastically, and pull at it suddenly and you will tear it brittly. Before we turn to rheology within the earth, a quick revision of some basic physics and the three mechanisms of heat transfer. This is important because heat transfer between the earth's super hot core and its cool atmosphere determines its thermal structure, which along with pressure and composition controls the rheology. We'll illustrate the three mechanisms of heat transfer using a pan of boiling water on a stovetop. Conduction is heat transfer through the microscopic collisions of particles and the movement of electrons within a solid. The particles themselves don't move. Conduction is why the handle of the metal pan feels warm to the touch. There is a steady increase in temperature between the tip of the handle, which is cooler, and the main body of the pot on the stove, which is warmer. Convection is heat transfer through the motion of particles in a fluid. Water heated at the bottom of the pan rises to be replaced by cooler water from above, which then heats up and rises and so on. Convection is why the water within the pan maintains its even temperature. There is very little gradient in temperature between water at the bottom of the pan and water at the top. The third type of heat transfer, radiation, is caused by electromagnetic waves. There is no matter involved. This is why you can feel the heat of the pan from a short distance away. This type of heating does occur in the earth, but because of radioactivity, but we won't need to consider it here. We'll now consider how heat transfers through earth's mantle through a mix of conduction and convection. This graph shows temperature along the x-axis with increasing depth and pressure down the y-axis. The geothermal gradient within the mantle looks like this. In the upper 100 kilometres or so, the gradient is linear with an increase of about 25 degrees Celsius for each kilometre increment in depth. This trend reflects how the outer shell of the earth loses heat through conduction due to the microscopic collisions of particles within a solid. However, below 100 kilometres, the geothermal gradient starts to turn. Below about 300 kilometres, the temperature remains quite steady, even as depth increases. This is because this part of the earth transfers heat through convection due to the bulk movement of molecules within a convecting fluid. This doesn't mean that the deep mantle is a liquid, but that it behaves like a fluid on geological timescales. The convection occurs very slowly with particles moving at rates of centimetres per year. Next, I'll superimpose upon this graph the melt state of peridotite, the main constituent rock of the upper mantle. At the surface, peridotite starts to melt at around 1200 degrees Celsius, shown by this 100% solid line known as the solidus. Heat it further, and peridotite becomes completely molten at the surface by 1800 degrees Celsius, the 100% melt line known as the liquidus. However, as you increase pressure and depth within the earth, both the solidus, the temperature at which peridotite starts to melt, and the liquidus, the temperature at which peridotite becomes completely molten, move to higher temperatures. The solidus and liquidus lines now outline three coloured areas representing three different melt states. The white area left of the solidus is completely solid, the dark pink area to the right of the liquidus is completely molten, and the light pink area between the solidus and the liquidus is partially molten. You can think of this area as a kind of mush, with solid chunks interspersed with pockets of melt. We can see that the geothermal gradient and the melt state of peridotite together define three distinct rheological layers within the outer part of the earth. At depths of up to around 100km, the geothermal gradient lies to the left of the solidus, so there is no melting. This part of the earth is known as the lithosphere, from the Greek lithos meaning rocky. The lithosphere rheologically is a rigid solid, and its shallowest, coolest part is also brittle. Where the geothermal gradient turns, it briefly crosses to the right of the solidus, leading to partial melting. However, it does not cross the liquidus, so it remains mostly solid. This layer is defined as the asthenosphere, asthenous means weak. Geologically it is best described as a soft, ductile plastic. Finally the mesosphere is the region within the mantle where the geothermal gradient is almost vertical, because cooling occurs through convection. The geothermal gradient is back to the left of the solidus, so there is no melting. Rheologically the mesosphere is best described as a stiff, plastic solid. Now we will consider these compositional and rheological descriptions together. Compositionally, what we see here are essentially two layers, the crust and the mantle. In this diagram the crust is further divided into oceanic and continental crust, more on this shortly. The crust and the uppermost mantle are rigid solids fused together forming the rheological layer known as the lithosphere. Below the lithosphere is a soft, plastic upper mantle layer, the asthenosphere, which is mostly solid with some partial melt and flows slowly under stress. Further down in the lower mantle is a stiffer plastic layer, the mesosphere, which also flows very slowly. We'll now look in a little more detail at the two types of crust. Oceanic crust is made of basalt, an iron and magnesium rich rock with about 48% silica or SiO2. Its density is around 3.0 grams per centimetre cubed. Oceanic crust is typically around 5-10km thick. Continental crust is made mostly of granite and sedimentary derivatives like sandstone. Granite is rich in sodium and aluminium and has silica content of about 60%. It is therefore lighter than basalt with a density of about 2.8 grams per centimetre cubed. On average it's around 30-40km thick, though it's thicker than this beneath mountain ranges. Both the oceanic crust and continental crust are therefore lighter than the upper mantle, which is made mostly of peridotite, density 3.2 grams per centimetre cubed. The crust therefore floats on the mantle. We'll explore this concept in more detail later in the course when we cover the topic of isostasy. We'll finish the lecture with a brief discussion of another type of space hazard that has to do with Earth's convecting outer core. Convective flow of electrically conductive liquid iron is organised into spinning columns by Earth's rotation, generating our magnetic field. The resulting magnetic field lines extend thousands of kilometres out into space, a region known as the magnetosphere. The field lines connect with the Earth at the magnetic north and magnetic south poles. These are near but not the same as the geographic poles, which refer instead to Earth's spin axis. Solar wind is an energetic stream of charged particles, mostly electrons and protons, that flow out from the sun across the solar system at speeds as high as 900km per second. The solar wind is caused by the sun's corona, the outermost layer of the solar atmosphere, expanding into space. The corona is the rim of the sun that is visible to the naked eye during a solar eclipse. Solar wind takes two to five days to reach the Earth, where the magnetosphere deflects most of it from impacting the Earth. Note that because of the solar wind, Earth's magnetosphere is actually asymmetric. It's compressed on Earth's day side, facing the sun, and drawn out into a long tail on the night side. Disturbances to the geomagnetic field from solar wind induce electric currents in the ionosphere, especially at high latitudes. These are known as the aurora borealis, or northern lights, in the northern hemisphere, and the aurora australis, or southern lights, in the southern hemisphere. The ionosphere is defined as the layer of Earth's atmosphere that is ionised by solar and cosmic radiation. It lies between 75km and 1,000km above the Earth's surface. From time to time, a larger release of energetic particles occurs called a coronal mass ejection. This video explains. Coronal mass ejections are huge bubbles of gas threaded through with magnetic field lines. We got a taste of how powerful such an event can be in July 2012. The NASA STEREO-A spacecraft recorded two small coronal mass ejections, followed by a Carrington-scale blast. Had this event occurred a week earlier, it might have hit us, with catastrophic effects. Scientists used it as a test case for understanding the behavior of Earth's magnetosphere under a powerful solar onslaught. A computer model shows a normal day. The solar wind flows continuously past the Earth, distorting its magnetic field, and pulling it around the back in a tail-like structure. A typical coronal mass ejection pushes Earth's field in, and lengthens its tail. The magnetosphere remains largely intact. A Carrington-scale event is a different story. It severely compresses Earth's magnetic field, while packing the boundary with plasma. The video referred to a Carrington event, named after Richard Carrington, an English astronomer who described a huge coronal mass ejection and geomagnetic storm on the 1st to 2nd of September 1859. This image shows Carrington's magnetometer record from the Greenwich Observatory in London the day before the event. This, meanwhile, shows the record from September 2nd. The upper trace is the strength of the field, and the lower trace is the compass direction or declination. During this Carrington event, telegraph systems in Europe and North America failed, giving their operators electric shocks and setting their offices on fire. Auroras were seen around the world, as far south as the Caribbean, Colombia and Hawaii in the Northern Hemisphere, and as far north as Queensland, Australia in the Southern Hemisphere. Auroras over the Rocky Mountains in the US were so bright that the glow awoke gold miners, who began preparing breakfast because they thought it was the morning. What would happen if a Carrington event occurred today? Firstly, satellites would be impacted. Charged particles can cause radiation damage to electronic components and electrical discharges that can cause further harm. GPS relies on propagating radio signals from space to the ground. The signal can be scintillated or broken up by coronal mass ejections, resulting in navigation problems. HF radio communication systems use the ionosphere to reflect radio signals over long distances. This includes ground-to-air and ship-to-shore communications, which could also be impacted. Magnetic storms can lead to geomagnetically induced currents in conductors such as power transmission lines. These currents are harmful to electrical transmission equipment, especially transformers, causing coils and cores to heat up and become overloaded. In the past, telegraph lines were also affected by geomagnetic storms. Finally, telluric currents are those induced within the Earth. These can affect pipelines. For example, pipeline flow meters can transmit erroneous flow information, and the corrosion rate of the pipeline can be dramatically increased. On March 13, 1989, Quebec suffered an electrical power blackout three days after astronomers witnessed a huge coronal mass ejection on the sun. The geomagnetically induced currents have found a weakness in Quebec's electrical power grid, with heating from the increased load causing a transformer to burn out. In less than two minutes, the entire Quebec power grid of 6 million customers lost power for nine hours. The 1989 geomagnetic storm was significant, but far smaller than the 1859 Carrington event. However, a solar storm of 2012 was of similar magnitude, but fortunately passed Earth's orbit without striking the planet, missing by nine days. A recent study suggested had it hit the Earth, it would have cost the US economy alone an incredible $40 billion per day. This concludes our look at Earth's evolution, its interior structure, and space hazards.